---
title: ROM 2.0.0 Released
date: 2016-07-27
tags: announcement
author: Piotr Solnica
---

We’re happy to announce the release of `rom 2.0` with a big list of improvements and new features! This release is a huge milestone for the project as **its infrastructure is now complete** - this means that all core APIs and high-level extensions are in place, and from now on it’s a matter of expanding functionality with new features.

Let’s take a quick look at the release highlights!

## Relation Schemas

This new feature allows you to define a relation schema with attribute names and types.

By defining a relation schema you establish the canonical representation of the data provided by a relation. This gives you type-safe commands out-of-the-box and allows you to define custom types for low-level database coercions.

On top of that, every adapter can extend Schema API with its own features, and that’s how the new version of `rom-sql` adds support for defining associations.

Here’s an example:

``` ruby
class Users < ROM::Relation[:users]
  schema do
    attribute :id, Types::Serial
    attribute :name, Types::String

    associations do
      has_many :tasks
      belongs_to :group
    end
  end
end
```

You can learn more about relation schemas in [the user documentation](/learn/core/schemas). For more information about associations check out [SQL docs](/learn/sql/associations).

## Command support in repositories

The new version of `rom-repository` adds support for database commands. This is a convenient API for common create/update/delete operations. It means **there’s no need to define custom command classes for common operations** anymore. Here’s an example:

``` ruby
class UserRepo < ROM::Repository[:users]
  commands :create, update: :by_pk, delete: :by_pk
end

# create
user = user_repo.create(name: "Jane")

# update
user_repo.update(user.id, name: "Jane Doe")

# delete
user_repo.delete(user.id)
```

Check out [the user documentation](/learn/repositories/quick-start) for more information.

## Repository changesets

Another new feature is the Changeset API, provided by `rom-repository`. This is a new way to handle data changesets via repository commands, similar to Elixir’s Ecto.

Changesets can be created via the `Repository#changeset` interface, here’s an example of “an update changeset”:

``` ruby
class UserRepo < ROM::Repository[:users]
  commands :create, update: :by_pk
end

user = user_repo.create(name: 'Jane', email: 'jane@doe.org')

changeset = user_repo.changeset(user.id, name: 'Jane Doe')

changeset.diff? # true
changeset.diff # {name=>"Jane Doe"}

user_repo.update(user.id, changeset)
```

This is a very fresh addition, please try it out and let us know what you think! You can learn more about it in [the user documentation](/learn/repositories/changesets).

## New website design & new documentation

Thanks to the awesome work of [Angelo Ashmore](https://github.com/angeloashmore), we’ve got a shiny new website design. We also updated the [user docs](/learn) and improved [API docs](/api) coverage for most important rom gems.

We’re looking for help with adding guides, please check out [the issues](https://github.com/rom-rb/rom-rb.org/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Aguide) if you’re interested in contributing a guide.

## Hanami and Trailblazer co-operation!

We started working closely with the [Hanami](http://hanamirb.org) and [Trailblazer](http://trailblazer.to) communities, looking into how our projects can help each other. As a result, we’ll be working on **a rom-based backend for hanami-model**, and **integrating rom with Reform** from Trailblazer.

These are really exciting times, we believe our co-operation will help us build a stronger ruby ecosystem!

## What happens next?

We’d like to finish stable versions of `rom-sql` and `rom-repository` later this year. The core `rom` gem is already at version 2.0, but the main adapter and repositories are still unstable. There will be a lot of effort going into improving the query DSL in `rom-sql`, there are a lot of `Sequel` features that we could leverage and make the adapter even more powerful.

Depending on the feedback, we’ll also focus on expanding functionality of existing features and bug-fixing. Please report any issues on [GitHub](https://github.com/rom-rb) for individual rom projects that you use.

## Gem updates summary

As part of this release following gems have been released:

- rom 2.0.0 [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/rom-rb/rom/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#v100-2016-07-27)
- rom-support 2.0.0 [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/rom-rb/rom-support/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#v200-2016-07-27)
- rom-sql 0.8.0 [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/rom-rb/rom-sql/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#v070-2016-07-27)
- rom-repository 0.3.0 [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/rom-rb/rom-repository/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#v020-2016-07-27)
- rom-mapper 0.4.0 [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/rom-rb/rom-mapper/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#v030-2016-07-27)
- rom-model 0.3.0 [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/rom-rb/rom-model/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#v020-2016-07-27)
- rom-rails 0.7.0 [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/rom-rb/rom-rails/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#v060-2016-07-27)
